---
layout: post
title: Objective discrimination
comments: True
lang: en
---

Discrimination is often portrayed as a defect of the human mind that needs to be corrected. Egalitarian social theories assert that social equality should prevail, and to that end, we should fight any form of discrimination vigorously, as it is invariably irrational, caused by baseless hostility and prejudice.   

<!--more-->

We all discriminate in our daily lives, for instance by favoring our relatives when helping others (a phenomenon explained by evolutionary game theory). It doesn't mean that it is always fair, and that opposing some forms of discrimination is a bad policy. But there are many instances in which it helps, and can even save lives. It is in fact an essential evolutionary mechanism that helps us survive and evolve. Fighting against any form of discrimination out of principle is irrational and dangerous. By understanding what it is, gathering data, testing its validity on a case by case basis and outlining risks and root causes, false hypothesis can be exposed more efficiently.

As this is a highly politicized subject, it's good to put aside passionate convictions and think of humans as self-learning organisms that have optimized, over countless generations, algorithms for maximizing their chance of survival. Through this lens, discrimination is the result of solving a pattern recognition problem called classification, as part of a logical reinforcement learning process. In psychology, this is known as "discrimination learning".

A caveman that escapes a bear attack interprets it as negative reward and immediately looks for patterns to avoid similar events in the future. He starts by identifying the most discriminative characteristics of the attacker and concludes that all similar animals, in this case bears, are potentially dangerous for humans. It doesn't mean they are bad in an absolute sense. This is a rational, acceptable behavior, despite the possibility that some bears might be inoffensive. Because of the high risk involved, the best strategy is to generalize early. If another bear would sue the caveman for discrimination, he could defend himself by invoking what is known in legal terms as "objective justification" (achieving a legitimate aim). One caveman could be entirely wrong, but as more of them reach the same conclusion, the probability that they are all wrong in avoiding bears is decreasing. This is how we've learned to avoid predators and other dangerous situations, what is edible, and so on.

The same approach is used by many computer programs. Email spam filters receive as negative feedback spam reports, analyze those emails and learn what are the most discriminative characteristics, called features. In the context of emails, the words are important features. This is how spam filters use machine learning to learn to classify emails containing "win", "money" and "casino" as being spam, which in most (but not all) cases is true.

To discriminate means to make a distinction based on a group property. People say that "the Dutch are straightforward" and "old folks are more risk averse". Usually, nobody objects to such statements, some even take pride in the positive traits linked to their group. These are properties of the average, it doesn't mean that everyone in the group shares them. Saying that a young driver is more likely to cause an accident is a form of discrimination, but it is not an incorrect statement, and insurance companies are using the age as a feature for pricing. In economics, this is known as statistical discrimination: estimating an individual's performance based on his group identity and the average behavior of that group.

While some features are allowed for classification, others are banned by contemporary social norms. Analyzing behavior based on ethnic or religious features is immediately labeled as racist or xenophobic and sometimes even sanctioned by law. But could it be that no such correlations exist? Is it plausible that hundreds or thousands of years of shared history never forms a group identity, with more prevalent behaviors and goals, that can be incompatible or conflicting with the goals and behaviors or others?

A well known ethnic minority in Romania are the Roma people, also known as gypsies, which represent around 3% of the population. The name similarity with Romanians is a confusing coincidence, as the Roma are a distinct ethnic group that migrated from India, arriving in Europe 900 years ago. For Romanians, the distinct lifestyle and high incidence of antisocial behavior in Roma communities is a well known observable fact. The EU used to criticize the Romanian state for not "fighting discrimination" enough. When Romania joined the EU and many travelled freely to other European countries, suddenly the same officials started to complain about improvised camps and high crime rates in "minorities of Romanian or Bulgarian origin", while trying hard to avoid ethnic distinctions, despite the obvious facts. But is such censorship in any way useful, and how come mentioning the nationality is allowed? Does it help to ban a few hand picked features, such as ethnicity and religion, and claim that is irrational to use them for classification? Wouldn't it be better for everyone to acknowledge reality and design policies to improve the situation of Roma communities, with cultural and behavioral particularities in mind, while raising awareness about their history of slavery and persecution? This policy of censoring observations can turn against the groups it tries to protect.  

There are many problems with classification. First, it can be based on false data, or data presented in a misleading way. Even if the data is correct, classification models are rarely perfect. They can be oversimplified, a problem called underfitting. Even if a behavior is observed more often in a group than in others, there can still be many individuals (possibly the majority) in that group that do not exhibit it (false positives). If it is a negative trait, these individuals may be treated unfair, and punitive measures can perpetuate the very behaviors they try to correct. If it is a positive one, classification can lead to unfounded favoritism of false positives. There might be other much better models and features, and the perception of behavior as being negative, neutral or positive can be subjective and sometimes it can be simply wrong.

If a feature is found to predict behavior perceived as negative in some context, the next question is how to act upon this information. In the extreme, history shows this can lead to persecution and even mass murder. That is why today, many pick the strategy of turning a blind eye, simply ignoring correlations and data. Choosing the best course of action is an optimization problem that can't be addressed without moral and ethical judgements, evaluating risks, benefits, short-term and long-term effects. But it is important to understand these tradeoffs and the rationality and caveats of discrimination, to stay objective and not make quick, binary, dogmatic judgements guided only by ideological convictions rather than logic and facts. Censorship never works indefinitely, and if authoritative channels don't acknowledge and address reality, then tabloids and fringe politicians hijack the public's attention and promote hatred based on flawed, oversimplified models, for petty financial or political gains. And that can lead to dark places.
